Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Karen Stolzno. She's a
researcher at Griffith University and the host of Monster
Talk, an award-winning science-based podcast. And today, we're talking
about her latest book, B, uh, The Journey of
the World. So Karen, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to
everyone. Thank you so much. It's good to be
here.
So, since we're going to talk about the history,
the sort of journey of the word bitch, as
you suggest in the title of your book, where
does it come from? I mean, what are its
origins? Uh,
WELL, it's really complicated. I think a lot of
people would think, oh, the word has just been
around for 50 years, 100 years that it's got
a short history, but it has a very long
history. It's been around for over 1000 years, and
it goes back to Old English, the version that,
uh, that we're familiar with today, spelling was a
little bit different, pronunciation was a bit different, but
the, the word and its original meaning, being a
female dog, goes back at least 1000 years. So
that's, we've traced. The history of the word, looking
at old documents. So this goes back to, uh,
medical documents where there were, uh, people who were
referring to bitches in the sense of a female
dog and using their milk or, uh, using their
urine to treat various disorders like warts and babies'
teething. So, uh, that, those are the earliest references
that we have. So we can Probably say that
if those are the earliest references that we have
in writing, it probably goes back even further. And
English is a Germanic language and it seems like
there might be versions of the word too, uh,
in, in other languages that we might have, uh,
that might be cognates or would be cognates to
the, the word bitch, meaning that they're related to
by that word. So it's a, a very old
word surprisingly.
But then the earliest meaning we know of it
is of female dog. Is that
it? Yes, so that's the, uh, I guess that
the literal meaning, that was the, the earliest and
first meaning is a female dog. So all the
other myriad meanings that we have today have really
spawned from that.
Mhm. And do you, do we know in any
way if the pronunciation of bit changed over time?
And I mean, when we're looking through it across
uh written documents, is it possible for us to
retrieve in any way how the word was pronounced?
Well, it, it is difficult to know for sure
because we don't have. The internet like we have
today, we don't have recordings of people using the
word. All that we have are these written examples.
So, uh, but a lot of work has been
done into phonology and into phonetics of how people
would have pronounced middle English and how they would
have pronounced Old English. So really the best. Guess
is that it would have been pronounced as it
would have been spelled originally as B I C
C E and it would have been pronounced something
along the lines of bitche. But I mean it
doesn't end there, there are just lots of different
spellings, uh, too many to list here, but different
ones for different variations of English too. So in
Scottish English, there were different spellings and slightly different
pronunciations and uh over time, the word evolved like
language does. So it was probably, uh, I can't
remember exactly. Uh, BUT it would have been around
the, probably Middle English that the word started to
change its, uh, orthography, which is its spelling, to
look more familiar to the way that we spell
it today. But of course, even nowadays, uh, you
could say that the, the spelling of the word
is standardized, but not really. We have Bish and
we have all different kinds of biznatch, different, uh,
variations of the word today, slang variants of the
word. And A lot of those are spelled a
little bit differently, and, uh, those can represent different
dialects, different social dialects or regional dialects. So the
word is continuing to evolve, and I think that's
the key for why the word's still around today.
It's changed shape and conformed so that it's become
modernized and it's still a very useful word.
Mhm. Yeah, and we're also going to talk about
some of the ways that the meanings of the
word have changed over time. But, I mean, apart
from the fact that at least originally and even
nowadays, I imagine that some people still use the
word that way. But apart from originally the meaning
being female dog, in what ways does bitch relate
to dog? And tell us about using bitch and
dog as insults.
Yeah. Oh, I mean, there's a lot to unpack
there because animal insults are, uh, animal metaphors used
as insults are among the earliest insults that we
have examples of. So we can go back to
ancient Greece and ancient Rome, and dog was being
used as an insult then. And it was being
used not only for women, but it was being
used for Men as well. And over time, it's
had slightly different meanings. Usually for a woman, if
we go back that far, it might refer to
a woman who was uh disloyal. So we have
those kinds of metaphorical associations with dogs as being
loyal, but a woman who was a dog was
disloyal, and it might have A reference to a
man's poor character, rather than necessarily being related to,
uh, the other aspects of a dog. So, the,
the different use of dog was really, I guess,
changed in some ways, but stayed the same too.
But it is totally one of the, the earliest
insults that, uh, we can find. And Bitch is
I guess a more specific version of that, referring
to specifically a uh a female dog and as
you said, the word isn't, I think that when
people think about the word today, they don't immediately
think of a dog, a female dog, unless it's
within that context. If you're, you've taken your dog,
your female dog, to the vet and you hear
that term, I think even people would wince at
that, and there are a lot of uses on,
uh, television where that's used for kind of comedic
effect, that double entend that bitch can mean a
female dog. Also be an insult for a woman
or for a man. So, uh, you have these
kind of competing uses, and I think that, uh,
when we, we hear a use, we need to
figure out the context. Is this an insult? Uh,
WHAT exactly does this mean? Is this referring to
a dog? But it's a very specialized term in
its, uh, literal sense, but in its metaphorical sense,
it can really mean so many different things. But,
uh, yeah, dog. IS still around as an insult.
Bitch is still around as an insult, and I
think will continue to be so. But a lot
of other insults have, uh, come about over the
centuries, and many of them have just died out.
And that that's what tends to happen with slang.
Slang can be very ephemeral. It's not always long-lasting.
A lot of words don't make it to the
dictionary. They might be around for a short period
of time. And then they disappear. But I think
nowadays with the advent of the internet and globalization,
a lot of these words we can trace and
they might stick around a lot longer, they might
diffuse, that is to spread more across certain generations
and groups of society. So that's what keeps these
words alive. But yeah, certainly these are old words
and they're gonna stick around.
Uh, ORIGINALLY did bitch also mean slut.
Ah, well, that's interesting, uh, it's an interesting question
because an earlier use of the word bitch was
to refer to a whore, so a woman who
was a prostitute, uh, and Slut. So bitch was
used in the way that we use slut today.
So this is going back hundreds of years ago,
and, uh, bitch would have been used to, to
mean a woman who was promiscuous. So we tend
to think of the word slut as, oh, well,
it would be contemporaneous with the, the word bitch,
which it was for maybe about 500 years or
a little bit longer. But slut had a very
different meaning going back in time. So, going back
hundreds of years. We find examples of it in
various books. Samuel Peep's diary, he talks about a
very pleasing slut that that he and his wife
have, but he's talking about a servant girl. So
he's not talking about, uh, a, a promiscuous woman,
uh, that they've held hostage there, uh, using for
sexual purposes. He's talking about a servant girl. Then
later, a lot of what we see this with
a lot of other words too. I like nave
for a young boy, those words often referred to
the, Lower socioeconomic groups of people, so people who
worked in houses, in big households, and, and did
the lowly chores around the house. And so a
lot of those terms became derogatory, so that's pegeration,
I think we'll probably get into that soon too,
but where words become bad over time. And that's
really what happened to the word slut. So originally
it just meant a servant girl, a wench, then
it came to mean a woman who was Slovenly
in her dress. So we see other references of,
uh, men being referred to as sluts. And it
was really just someone who was sloppy. And, uh,
the, the funny thing is that slut didn't really
change in meaning to the, the use that we
currently have today, the most, uh, kind of salient
use today of a promiscuous woman. My father, who
passed a number of years ago, when I was
young, he would refer to a woman, uh, as
a slut if she was dressed in a sloppy
manner. And I said, Dad, you can't say that
anymore. We don't, that's not what the word means
anymore. But really going back to, uh, the 60s
is around the time where it's attracted the, the
current meaning that it has of, of being a
promiscuous woman or a woman who's accused of being
promiscuous. It's certainly used in regards to men as
well, but for men, it's It's typically more of
a compliment to call a man a slut than
a woman, because it's implying that you're, you sleep
around, uh, or that it's suspected that you do,
you're a wanton woman, lascivious. It's got a lot
of negative connotations today. But, uh, going back hundreds
of years ago, it was just a very everyday
term for, for a woman who worked in a
certain industry.
Mhm. Right. So when did bitch develop the meaning
of unpleasant woman?
Well, that's very interesting because there are lots of
different theories. Some people think it's maybe around 1400,
so closer to Middle English, that the word became
an insult for women. But we do have evidence
going back to, uh, written documents, where it appears
that bitch was being used. As an insult for
women, more in that sense of a slut, modern
day slut or a modern day whore, uh, going
back probably as early as those earliest references to
female dogs. So, we could say, maybe, definitely by
the 1400s that, uh, bitch was being used in
that way as an insult for women. Uh, BUT
possibly hundreds of years earlier. So again, all we
can go by are those, uh, the records that
we have, the existing artifacts that show us the
progression of the meaning of the word, but it
does seem like as long as the word has
been around, it's been, it's had that literal meaning
for a female dog, but also that metaphorical or
figurative meaning for uh as an insult for a
woman. And for a man too, it seems like
that could go back as early as that uh
the the reference to women. Mhm.
So by studying and understanding how over time a
word like be, uh, changed meaning, acquired new meanings,
and kept some of its meanings. I mean, by
studying this sort of history, what can we learn
about these kinds of phenomenon? Linguistic phenomena related to
how the meaning of words change over time. Do
you think that bitch is a particularly good illustrative
example of those kinds of phenomena?
Oh, I think it really is an excellent example
of what linguists would call semantic change. So that
is talking about meaning in. Words and how that
changes over time. So, lots of different things can
happen to words. We're talking about slang being ephemeral
a little while ago, and so some words can
come into our language and then just disappear. They
might go unrecorded. It might be a small amount
of people who use them and then they die
out. And then other words can stick around for
a very long period of time, like, bitch. Sometimes
they can retain their Existing or original meaning, but
lots of things can can really happen and it's
unpredictable. Language is like a runaway train in many
ways. We just can't be sure what's going to
happen with particular words, but they can acquire negative
connotations, and that was the term I used earlier,
peeration. So that means when a word, it might
have a neutral meaning, so in this case, a
female dog. For bitch. And then over time, it
attracts these negative connotations and a negative meaning. Words
can also, uh, undergo a process called amelioration, which
is where they improve in meaning. And that is
less common. We don't see that happening as much,
but the interesting thing is with bitch, that it
has undergone all of these processes. So not only
has the word stuck around, it's evolved. In meaning,
it has developed negative connotations and become an insult
for women and for men, and it's also acquired
positive connotations. So it can be used in positive
ways today amongst friends and used in a, as
a compliment to women or to men. Depending on
the the group that it's used in. So it's
just a really interesting example. And uh the fact
that the original meaning has stayed around concurrently is
interesting too. So we have all of these competing
meanings that can get very confusing as to what
bitch means.
Right. But I mean, you mentioned pegerration, amelioration. Do
we have a good understanding of how words go
through these processes and how they acquire or change
meanings over time? I mean, do we understand or
have a good understanding of the factors that play
a role, a role here?
Well, I think it really is gonna depend on
the words. So for I talk about bitch, the
journey of a word, uh, another iteration of the
name is the story of a word, and I
think that each word really has its own story,
has its own journey, and again, Some words can
die out, some words can uh can continue to
stick around and original meanings might coexist with, with
different meanings. So words are a lot like humans
in the way that they evolve, and a lot
of people going back to, to um uh Darwin
have written about the evolution of language being comparable
to the evolution of humans and other creatures. And
uh so um with regards to um What you're
talking about with pegeration uh and with amelioration. It's
just going to depend on, I think the, the
society and the culture of the time. So I
think that words really do, especially nouns, not so
much grammar, but, uh, you know, content words, nouns
are going to, to reflect our attitudes and our
values and our beliefs of the day. So I
think that that's what's Really happened with bitch. Uh,
WE had that original meaning, and then we have
a meaning that really reflects morals and values about
women and the, the behavior of women, and morals
and values and attitudes towards men and the way
that men behave. So it's, uh, your words are
really going to be, I guess, a kind of
time machine that's Tell us about, uh, give us
a snapshot or a window into a particular time
and tell us, well, how did people think? How
did they, they see other people, how did they
see themselves, uh, what factors were at play, but
yeah, it's really a, a sociocultural phenomenon, um, but
it's still something that's unpredictable.
So, in the book, you also talk about the
feminist bitch. So what does it mean and does
it have a positive connotation there?
So, it absolutely does, and again within its own
context. So this is going back to the 1960s
and the 1970s when we have various waves of
feminism in history. And so we're talking about maybe
the second wave of feminism where uh women started
looking at language and asking a lot of questions
about uh sexism that was in language. And so
the the issue of bitch came up, uh, and
there's a, a, an activist, feminist activist called Jorene
who penned a manifesto called the bitch manifesto. And
that is, uh, basically a, a very long and
very interesting look at the word bitch and the
way that it's been used and how it's been
leveraged negatively towards women. But, uh, in, in Doreen's
opinion, and this, this was kind of a, I
guess a um a badge of honor really for
the term bitch and it and showed the evolution
of the word, but she said, well, this word
really means a powerful woman, this is an empowering.
Word. This is a word that uh reflects a
woman who is, is powerful and she's strong and
she's ambitious, and uh she's competitive, and she really
made some interesting observations too that when a lot
of these descriptors are used in with regards to
men, that they're compliments. Uh, BUT if they're used
towards women, then she's seen as being unfeminine. She's
seen instead of being docile and quiet and keeping
her place in society, that she's being outspoken. And
you know, we see that a lot today in
the way that the word is used in politics
too. It's used against women in politics, and uh
so it's really a matter of women being Uh,
criticized for behaving in the ways that that men
do, but that was really a turning point for
the word bitch, and, uh, since that time we've
had a lot of women in positions of power,
so lawyers and politicians and uh musicians, Writers, feminists,
activists of all kinds, coming out and saying, Well,
I am a bitch. I identify as being a
bitch. So it's become this self-identifying label, uh, for
a woman who, who sees herself and is seen
as being strong and powerful. So it's an empowering
term. That was, that was the turning point. We,
we do have some examples too, of, uh, Ernest
Hemingway, who used the term in a more positive
way too. He would use the word bitch to
refer to women who, uh, were powerful and strong
and sexy and had grits. So he was using
it in a complementary way, but still being used
by a man, uh, in that context, it can
be dehumanizing. But that was Really where the at
a point where the word was shifting in meaning,
and it is just again spawned so many different
uh more positive uses of the word since that
time.
But this is very interesting because isn't it the
case that the word bitch tended to be used,
uh tended to be used and perhaps it's still
used, I'm not sure, as a, also as a
pejorative against feminists.
Yes. So that's a good point as well. Uh,
WE, we don't have too much evidence of that,
but if we go back to the first wave
of feminism, we find some examples of women who
were advocates, who were early feminists, they wouldn't have
described themselves that way. That's a more recent term.
Uh, WOMANIST is another term as well. And, uh,
those were really used as insults around the same
time. So when we had, uh, the, the fight
for women's right to vote, we have some examples
of women being labeled as as bitches. But really
they were seen, I think, as being, again, unfeminine.
They were being, they were seen as masculine because
they were doing the kinds of things that men
would do, protesting. Uh, AND fighting for their rights.
And, uh, so they were really looked down upon
and, and, uh, endured a lot of criticism and
being put into jail and having eggs thrown at
them and rotten fish and all kinds of terrible
things with, and they were just fighting for equality.
But, yeah, we, we do have some examples there
and, and I think that that's um They're the
early days of this word really reaching a turning
point of becoming uh I have being identified with
feminists.
Mhm. So the word also ties in a way
to the history and issues surrounding feminism.
Right. Absolutely, yeah, I think that, uh, again, to
look at a word like uh feminist, uh or
a word like womanist, those were being seen as
negative in the early days, uh, and they, there,
there are still negative associations with those words today.
Uh, BUT I think that um bitch was, was
within that same repertoire and vocabulary of words that
were um held against women who fought for equality
and rights, equal rights.
And the word feminist itself uh sometimes is also
used as a pejorative.
Absolutely, yeah, I think a lot of uh people
have criticized the use of the word today and,
and women that we would see as being feminists
would reject the word and say, well, I'm not
a feminist, so we, we see that going back
to, I think, uh, Virginia Woolf. Uh, AND, uh,
the more recent uh feminists like I think Gloria
Steinem, Jermaine Greer, so others rejected the word. Uh,
Simone de Beauvier as well, rejected the word originally
and said, Well, I, I'm not a feminist, because
the word had such negative connotations. And then it
was around the 1970s that the word started acquiring
more of a sense of empowerment and women who
were Advocating for themselves and fighting for their own
rights, but again, even to this day, I think
Beyonce at one point said, oh I'm not a
feminist, That's a bad word. We need a new
word, bootylicious, I think is what she came up
with. But, uh, yeah, there's still a lot of
negativity around the word, and I think, uh, it's
a turnoff for, for some people, but really, feminism
is about elevating women and, uh, bringing equality into
society for all people. Uh, AND so it's ultimately
a good thing, but just the way that it's
wielded as an insult or wielded to, to mean
a woman who's difficult, a woman who is, uh,
behaves like a man, all, all of these negative
associations, uh, are really coexisting with the positive senses
of the word. And that's another process we could
talk about too, which is, um, the euphemism treadmill,
which is where we have Uh, words in the
language that have become insults, have negative connotations, they
might be stigmatized in some way, and so new
words are then introduced to replace those words, but
then the same thing happens to them too. So
we see that a lot with uh terms regarding
disease or disability that uh words will be changed
and new words introduced uh to, to hopefully bring
in more positive connotations, but then They, they go
undergo that process of pegeration again and uh and
it just keeps happening and it's a kind of
vicious cycle, I guess, of language.
Mhm, uh, I, I mean by that, do you
mean words that we use to refer to diseases?
To, yeah, some diseases uh that are stigmatized, uh,
so certainly when it comes to words, um, within
the lexicon of mental illness, I think a good
example too is a word like toilet. Nowadays people
will refer to uh restroom or bathroom, and those
are really euphemisms, uh, and we've got earlier terms
for toilet like a, you know, a water closet
or a privy, a latrine, so all of these
different words for something that's embarrassing, you know, it's
associated with human waste and so people don't want
to talk about these topics. So they come up
with euphemistic terms to refer to the toilet and
And then that keeps getting replaced because no one
wants to use the word, and it's embarrassing to
refer to in society. And so that's really why
we have the words, uh, restroom today, or powder
room for ladies, uh, all those other kinds of
terms that, um, things that, that we find repulsive
or disgusting or embarrassing, humiliating, uh, that we just
don't want to talk about. And so we come
up with euphemisms, and then They acquire the same
negative connotations and get replaced, so it keeps going
and going.
But because of all this negativity that still surrounds
the word bitch, uh, I mean, the common ways
that people typically use the word in society in
general, do you think that even with some of
the more positive connotations that feminists were able to
attribute to it, uh, at The end of the
day, uh, they were, do you think they were
able to uh to reclaim the world or
not? Yeah, and then that's something I go into
a lot, uh, in the book because it's really
an open-ended question, uh, with an open-ended outcome. I
think to some extent the word has been reclaimed
and uh Has been appropriated and developed positive connotations
in, and I think it's something that we need
to again analyze context. How is it being used?
Who is it being used by, how is the
word being received? So I think you've got all
different kinds of uh uh variations and combinations that
you can find within that. So if it's a
woman who is using it about herself and It's
a positive context, then she's reclaiming the word. But
if it's being used against her, especially by a
man, it's being used as an insult, as a
negative term, then it's not reclaimed in that instance.
So, uh, it's, you're going to continue to have
that, uh, fine balance, and, uh, I think it's
never going to be reclaimed completely. Uh, AND you
have Parallels with other words like gay and queer,
and the N word as well. So you can
say that those terms are used within the, the
groups that they refer to and they can have
positive connotations. So they're basically saying if I use
this word, uh, I'm saying something positive about myself
as a self-identifying label and something positive about my
community and people around me, but it can certainly
be used, all of those words. CAN be used
as insults outside of the group, so by outsiders.
And so that's very much the case with bitch
as well. It's used within the gay community, often,
and it can be used as a compliment, but
it can be used as, as an insult, and
same thing for women. It can be used as
a self-identifying label or it can be used as
a term of abuse. So you just have all
of these. It's like a juggling act really, uh,
and the shifting meanings and uh but they're they're
all coexisting. So, I just don't think the word
will ever entirely be reclaimed, same with those other
words.
Right. Do some uses of the word bitch uh
uh manifest common sexist ideas in society, and if
so, what would these ideas be?
Ah, well, yeah, I think that that's probably one
of the most salient uses of the word today,
that it's seen as an insult, and that would
be the main complaint, even though some feminists have
attempted to reclaim the word. There are other feminists
and uh people in maybe gender studies. Uh, WHO,
who would never want to use the term and
think that it's invariably an insult and that it
cannot be reclaimed, uh, that it ultimately comes back
to negative attitudes towards women in society, uh, and
so it, it really does encompass a lot of
negative attitudes towards women, uh, that, that women. Are,
uh, somehow the second sex or, or, or lesser,
there really is no direct equivalent term for men,
even though bitches used, uh, with regards to men
in many instances, there's no exact, Equivalent term for,
or insult term for, for men. But we see
in general that there are thousands of insults that
have been recorded for women and many fewer for
men, and often they're just not as offensive. So
terms like bitch, going back a couple 100 years
ago, there was a lexicographer called Francis Gross, who
wrote a classical dictionary of the vulgar tongue, and
he wrote about how bitch was, The worst appellation,
the worst insult that you could possibly call a
woman. It was even, uh, more provocative and insulting
than whore. So, I don't know if we'd look
at bitch that way today. Maybe the, the C
word, I don't know if I can say that
on this show, but, uh, the words related to
females or words related to women or women's body
parts tend to be the most offensive terms. Uh,
WOMEN have really Uh, attracted a lot of negative
terms and it's just a reflection of how women
are viewed in society that they to this day,
despite leaps and bounds with equality, there's still inequality,
women are still the second sex. Mhm.
So you refer to the C word there, is
there any relationship between bitch and the sea world
or not?
Ah, well, I think that they're often used. Together,
and I think that there are some parallels with
the, the histories of the words. Uh, THE C
word was originally used as a literal term as
well, to for a body part. It was even
used, uh, going back hundreds of years ago, uh,
in street names when In the United Kingdom in
England you had street names which were named for
the professions of the street, so Barbour Street or
uh whatever the name of the uh the different
trades and industries that were done on that street.
WERE references to that profession. And so there was
a Uh, a street that was named after prostitutes,
and it had the C word within that name.
So that's going back maybe to the 1300s, I
think. So, uh, it wasn't always an insult, but
it, it has been for a very long time
used to refer to the, the woman's body part
or the female body part. And, uh, but it
was in an anatomical sense in, uh, medical dictionaries
and, and medical books, and it just More recently
became an insult term. So, uh, it's, it was
an insult term for women and, and only recently
an insult term for men. But that has a
very interesting history too, where in some countries, so
I'm from Australia originally, and it's, it can be
used for friends, much in the same way that
bitch can be used to show that you are
familiar with someone, you're close to them. Uh, AND
you can use these words about them and they're
not going to think think anything negative about you
for doing that. Uh, IN Scottish English, it's similar,
but in here in America, it is a, uh,
probably one of those final frontier insults that it's
very negative, very bad associations, uh, and, and probably
the way that Francis Gross. Described bitch, going back
hundreds of years ago, the C word is probably
replaced that I think in that regard and would
be, it's, you don't see it much in or
hear it much in on the radio or on
television, so it's uh highly offensive to this day.
Right. In one of my previous questions, you alluded
to the fact that bitch can also be used
to refer to men. Uh, HOW can it be
used to insult men?
So, uh, yeah, as I stated earlier, I think
that we have some evidence that bitch has been
used as an insult for men for as long
or almost as long as it's been used as
an insult for women. But it's used a little
bit differently. So when it's used in regards to
men, it's likening them to women, and things that
might be perceived as negative about women. So, uh,
often it's Used to mean that a man is
not being a, uh, doing a terribly good job
of being a man. He's not being strong, he's
not being masculine. So whereas we have that kind
of dichotomy that a woman who is a bitch
is, is outspoken and she's ambitious and she's controlling,
and she's loud and powerful. Uh, BUT men who
are like this are seen as being weak, and,
uh, it's, and really, uh, an emasculating insult for
men, the way that it's used. And, uh, so
it's, it's really saying that a man is like
a woman in ways that are negative. He's weak
and he's wishy-washy. Uh, HE'S perhaps gay, uh, he's
effeminate. So that the earlier examples we have of
bitch being used toward men is with regards to,
uh, usually their gender presentation. Um, AND we've got
an older term for, uh, men who might have
dressed as women, uh, calling them mollies. So Giving
them a female name and often they would use
the term bitch among their community to refer to
effeminate men.
Mhm. Yeah, in the book at a certain point,
you mentioned phrases directed at men to exhort them
not to behave like women. One of them includes
the word bitch. I mean, you mentioned phrases like,
you're such a pussy, don't be a girl. Don't
be a little bitch. You don't have any balls,
grow a pair, and things like that. So, I,
I mean, the, uh, what do these phrases really
suggest? What do they, what are they referring to?
What are they trying to tell men?
Yeah. Well, I think, you know, it's, it's very,
very unfair, but it is the way that a
lot of parents raise their, their boys to become
men who are strong, that they don't cry, that
they don't show any uh feminine aspects. So that's
why we really have all of those terms as
social conditioning, to say, don't be like this, don't
run like a girl, don't cry like a girl.
Don't play with, uh, dolls if you're a boy,
don't like pink things if you're a boy. So,
and these, uh, some of these things too. Have
changed over time. Um, HISTORICALLY, pink hasn't always been
associated with girls, so it's really just a social
construct, these kinds of behaviors. And, uh, yeah, they're,
they're really unfortunate phrases. I, I have a son,
a young son, and so I'm very careful to
Not use these phrases with him, to not condition
him with these phrases, and uh you know, I
encourage him to cry if he feels like it
and to express himself and, Uh, to not withhold
his feelings and his emotions. I think that it's
very unhealthy, and I think that we, we should
not stereotype boys or girls, that there's no particular
way that girls should behave or particular way that
boys should behave, but it is just an unhealthy
hypermasculinity, really, to say that boys can't cry, uh,
boys can't. Boys have to run fast and boys
have to, uh, you know, play hard and tackle
and be aggressive and violent. So they're, they're really
just social constructs, uh, and it's just, just very
unfair to impose those roles on boys, but I
think that there is a strong connection between those
kinds of phrases and a word like bitch that
really does try to condition. Gender roles in society
and tell us how boys should behave and how
girls should behave, and it's, it's just BS.
So in that sense, the word bitch and other
words, of course, but we're focusing here on this
word, uh, connects to ideas people have about gender
and gender roles,
correct? Yes, absolutely. I think that really tied in
so that again, the earliest uses of bitch going
back to a female dog has that strong association
with females and with a female gender presentation, and
so I think that The way that it's used
is really enforcing or reinforcing these roles in society,
that women should behave a certain way, and if
they don't, they're bitches, and men should behave a
certain way, and if they don't, they're bitches too.
Um BUT with the Different connotations for for different
uh gender.
How about the expression, son of a bitch, where
does it come from?
Oh, that has been around for probably as long
as the word bitch and has been used as
an insult, so we have examples of that that
go back uh to some very early writings too.
Probably the spelling that we would most recognize uh
would be that as used by, by Shakespeare. Uh,
SO it's really been around for a very long
time too. So, again, it does go back to
insulting a woman. You're saying that a man is
being judged by the actions of his mother, and
again, there are lots of ways that you can
look at this, but A bitch is a bad
woman, and a son of a bitch is a
bad man, who's basically related to a bitch. His
mother is a bitch. It's insulting his precious mother.
We have, um, son of a whore, a whore's
son as well. Different variations, uh, even going back
to, uh, uh, Arthur and Merlin. So very old
examples of this, but it's really been Embraced by
American English. It was very popular in British English
for hundreds of years too, and it was then
used in literature for American English and just became
a very uh um heavily associated with American English
and it's uh just used very widely. Not as
much today. You've got a lot of uh uh
euphemistic versions of Son of a bitch as well.
And uh that are used in television and comedy
and things like that, but uh certainly it's uh,
Its history is as long as that of bitch.
Mhm.
And what are the most current meanings of bitch?
I mean, what are the ways that people use
the word do they, what do they mean by
it exactly, most commonly.
Oh I think all of the, the older uses
of the term are still around, but we have,
uh, I guess more modern versions. The different spellings
I was talking about earlier, so Bish and biznat
and the just different slang variants of the word
bitch. And, uh, also positive terms that I think
are born of the more feminist empowering, self-identifying label
of bitch too, where women might refer to themselves
as being, you know, bad bitches. And so bad,
we have that, uh, uh, amelioration. Again, where you've
got words like bad and wicked and bitch as
well that have these negative connotations that over time
have developed positive connotations too. So, uh, yeah, I
think that feasibly any Version of, uh, the, the
meaning of bitch can be used. You've got to
look at the context to figure out exactly what's
being said, but it's uh very common now on
television, common on, uh, radio, common on the internet.
It's a very popular word, an everyday word, and
it, uh, uh, just has so many different variations,
and people can spell it whatever way that they
want, and people will understand what they mean, and,
uh, it's Yeah, just concurrently an insult, but also
a positive term, but with just different spellings, pronunciations,
different use within different communities and groups. It's really
quite a powerful word.
So one last question then, how do you look
at the word bitch generally speaking? I mean, because
we went through all of these kinds of meanings
that it has in different contexts and situations where
it has gone through pegeration and others where it
has gone through amelioration and things like that. Do
you think of it as mostly a positive or
a negative word?
Well, That's really hard to say because it's just
going to depend on the individual and their experiences
with that word. I think most, if not all,
women have been called a bitch at some point,
and, uh, a lot of men have been called
a bitch or they've been called a son of
a bitch. So it's going to depend on that
individual interpretation of how someone perceives that word and
How that's being used against them, uh, and, and
just their associations with the word, whether they've been
negative or positive. But I think in an overarching
sense, the most salient use is that it's an
insult. So we can say, well, it still means
a female dog 1000 years later, and that's true.
At the same time, it can be used as
a self-identifying label, so it can be used as
an empowering term. Uh, AND again, that's all down
to context. But I think that, uh, at the
end of the day, it's most seen as an
insult, as a term of abuse, particularly for women,
and that it shows negative attitudes, uh, towards women,
and that, um, you know, it's, it's offensive, uh,
in many contexts. So I, I really think that's
the The, the most salient use of the word
today, but, uh, you have all of these concurrent
and conflicting uses and meanings, and, uh, I think
that the word's just going to continue to somersault
and, and do all of these different, uh, changes
and stick around and, uh, uh, I think evolve
so that it can stay alive.
Yeah, and it will also change meaning for something
else somewhere in the future as well, right? Yeah,
yeah, it's really difficult to know exactly what a
word is going to do, but I think just
based on the previous behavior of the word that
it's, it's going to continue to evolve and change.
Yeah, great. So the book is again bit the
journey of the World. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. There it
is. OK, great. So, Karen, apart from the book,
where can people find you and your work on
the internet?
OK. Well, people can find me at my website,
which is Karen Stolzner.com. And people can also find
me at monstertalk.org. So I have a podcast that
I do with my co-host Blake Smith, and uh
so we talk about cryptids, monsters, legendary creatures, ghosts,
anything strange, paranormal, supernatural. And so people can find
me there too. I also write for uh Psychology
Today and Cambridge blogs, so a number of publications
out there, but yeah, those are my main things,
my website and I got a number of other
books too, that I've published, so please do check
them out.
Great. I'll be leaving some links to all of
that in the description of the interview as well.
And thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a very
fun and informative conversation.
Great, thank you so much, Ricardo. I've really enjoyed
this.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Dio
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry V. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren,
Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffik, Tom
Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivas, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.